.. _troubleshooting:

***************
Troubleshooting
***************

Stork Agent
===========

This section describes the solutions for some popular issues with the Stork Agent.

--------------

:Issue:       The machine is authorized in the Stork Server and shows no error but has no application.
:Description: The user installed and ran the Stork Server and the Stork Agent.
              Next, it authorized the machine. After a few times, on the "Machines" page,
              the "Last Refreshed" column value is actual, and the "Error" column value is empty,
              but the "Daemons" column is still blank. The "Application" section on the specific
              machine page is blank too.
:Solution:    Check that:
              - Kea Control Agent, Kea DHCP4, or/and Kea DHCP6
              - BIND9
              daemons are running.
:Explanation: If the "Last Refreshed" column value is actual and the "Error" column value
              has no error then the communication between Stork Server
              and Stork Agent works correctly. It means that the cause of the problem
              is between the Stork Agent and the daemons. But the Stork Agent doesn't report
              any connection problem. Probably none of the Kea/BIND9 daemons are running.
              BIND9 daemon communicates with Stork Agent directly. Kea DHCP4 and Kea DHCP6
              connect via Kea Control Agent. If you see in the Stork UI only "CA" daemon
              then it means that the Kea Control Agent is running, but the DHCP daemons aren't.

--------------

:Issue:       After starting, the Stork Agent stocks in an infinite "sleeping" loop.
:Description: The Stork Agent is running with the server support (the ``--listen-prometheus-only` flag is unused).
              First, the ``try to register agent in Stork server`` message is displayed.
              Next, the Stork Agent prints only the ``sleeping for 10 seconds before next
              registration attempt`` message in the loop.
:Solution 1.: The Stork Server isn't running. First, start the server service and then the Stork Agent daemon.
:Solution 2.: The provided server URL in the Stork Agent is invalid. Provide correct URL.

--------------

:Issue:       After start the agent falls into infinite loop of messages: "loaded server cert:
              /var/lib/stork-agent/certs/cert.pem and key: /var/lib/stork-agent/certs/key.pem"
:Description: The Stork Agent runs correctly. The registration passed. But after the
              "started serving Stork Agent" message, the agent constantly, in the 1-second interval,
              returns one message on standard output about loading server certs. The network
              traffic shows that the server rejects all packets from the agent (TLS HELLO handshake failed).
:Solution:    Re-register the agent to regenerate the certificates. You can use the ``stork-agent register`` command. 
:Explanation: The /var/lib/stork-agent/certs/ca.pem file is missing or corrupted. The re-registration
              removes old files and creates new ones.


--------------

:Issue:       The agent doesnt started, but displays ``open /var/lib/stork-agent/certs/cert.pem: no such file or directory
              could not load cert PEM file: /var/lib/stork-agent/certs/cert.pem`` error message.
:Solution:    Re-register the agent to regenerate the certificates. You can use ``stork-agent register`` command.             

--------------

:Issue:       The agent prints on stdout the message ``problem with connecting to dhcp daemon: unable to forward command to
              the dhcp6 service: No such file or directory. The server is likely to be offline``.
:Solution:    Try to call ``systemctl start kea-dhcp4 kea-dhcp6``
:Explanation: The ``kea-dhcp4.service`` or ``kea-dhcp6.serive`` (depending on the service type in the message) is not running.
              If the above commands don't resolve the problems, then see the Kea ARM for the troubleshooting.

--------------

:Issue:       The Stork Agent receives the "remote error: tls: certificate required" message from the Kea Control Agent.
:Description: The Stork Agent and the Kea Control Agent are running, but these daemons cannot establish the connection.
              The standard output of the Strok Agent contains the errors with the above message.
:Solution:    Install the valid TLS certificates in the Stork Agent or set "cert-required" value in ``/etc/kea/kea-ctrl-agent.conf`` to "false".
:Explanation: By default, the Stork Agent uses no certificates (standalone mode) or self-signed certificates (generated by
              the Stork Server). If the Kea Control Agent has set "cert-required" value to "true" then it requires
              that the Stork Agent will use HTTPS connections with valid, trusted TLS certificates.
              You can disable this option when you use the self-signed certificates or replace the Stork Agent
              TLS credentials with the trusted ones.

--------------

:Issue:       Kea Control Agent returns ``Kea error response - status: 401, message: Unauthorized`` message.
:Description: The Stork Agent and the Kea Control Agent are running, but a connection doesn't establish. 
              The Stork Agent logs contain similar messages: ``failed to parse responses from Kea:
              { "result": 401, "text": "Unauthorized" }`` or ``Kea error response - status: 401, message: Unauthorized``.
:Solution:    Update the ``/etc/stork/agent-credentials.json`` file with the valid user/password credentials.
:Explanation: The Kea Control Agent supports the Basic Auth authentication. If it is enabled, then the valid
              credentials must be provided in the Stork Agent configuration. Check if this file exists and
              contains the valid user, password, and IP address.

--------------

:Issue:       During the registration process, the Stork Agent returns the ``problem with registering machine:
              cannot parse address`` message.
:Description: The Stork is configured with the IPv6 address with zone ID from the "link-local" scope.
              The daemon displays the ``try to register agent in Stork server`` and then the above error.
              The application exists with the fatal status.
:Solution:    Use the IPv6 address from the "global" scope or IPv4.
:Explanation: The IPv6 "link-local" addresses with zone ID aren't supported by the Stork Server.

--------------

:Issue:       During the registration process, the Stork Agent returns the ``problem with registering machine:
              Post "/api/machines": unsupported protocol scheme ""`` message.
:Solution:    The ``--server-url`` argument is provided in the wrong format. It must be the canonical URL.
              It should begin with the protocol (``http://`` or ``https://``), then contain the host (DNS name or IP address - for IPv6 escape them with the square brackets), and end with the port (delimited from the host by a colon). For example: ``http://storkserver:8080``.

---------------

:Issue:       The values in the ``/etc/stork/agent.env`` or ``/etc/stork/agent-credentials.json`` were changed
              but it didn't affect the Stork Agent.
:Solution:    Restart the daemon.
:Explanation: The Stork Agent read configurations only at startup.

--------------

:Issue:       The values in the ``/etc/stork/agent.env`` were changed, and the daemon was restarted, but
              the agent still uses the default values.
:Description: The agent is running using the ``stork-agent`` command. It uses the parameters passed
              from the command-line but completely ignores the ``/etc/stork/agent.env`` file entries.
              If the agent is running as the SystemD daemon then it uses expected values.
:Solution:    Load the environment variables from the ``/etc/stork/agent.env`` file before running the CLI tool.
              For example, you can call ``. /etc/stork/agent.env``.
:Explanation: The ``/etc/stork/agent.env`` contains only the environment variables. It isn't automatically
              loaded by the Stork Agent. It must be done manually. The default SystemD service unit is configured to load this file before starting the agent.
